# What is Data Modeling?

Data modelling is the process of taking data from various sources; loading, structuring, and relating data logically to other data; and enhancing, embellishing, and generally preparing the data for use.The data modelling process includes:
- Determining the optimal structure and shape of the source data to analyse (e.g., whether to bring in all the data, full data, or summary data).
- Loading the data from the source into the data model (Power Pivot in this case).
- Defining the logical relationships between the various tables (which is similar to what you do with VLOOKUP() inside Excel).
- Defining data types (e.g., specifying whether a column of data is numeric or a column of currency values or a column of text fields).
- Creating new insights from the source data so that you can analyse concepts that don't exist natively in the source data but yet can be calculated or created inside the data model. For example, if you have a table of transactional data with cost price and sell price, you can extend the data model to include a calculation for margin, margin percentage, etc., even though these concepts are not explicitly in the source data. Once you have modelled these new facts in the data model, they can be reused over and over by people using your workbook.

## Huom! Shaping the data

 When I say "shape" of data, I am taking about things like how many tables you import, how many columns are in each table, which columns are in each of the tables, etc.
 
One reason this advice is important is because the shape of data in transactional systems (or relational databases) is seldom the ideal shape for Power Pivot. When the IT department executes an enterprise BI project, one of the important first steps is to shape the data so it is optimal for reporting. This step is normally completely transparent to the end user (i.e., you), and hence the end user is shielded from the need to do this. But I am sharing this important information with you here and now because you need to understand data shaping if you want to have efficient and effective Power Pivot data models. Just copying what you have in your source data is unlikely to be optimal.
