## Understanding Row Context

A row context is a context that always contains a single row and DAX automatically defines it during the creation of calculated columns. 

When you defined the calculated column, DAX started an iteration from the first row of the table; it created a row context containing that row and evaluated the expression. Then it moved on to the second row and evaluated the expression again.

> Filter Context and Row Context are the only kinds of context in DAX. Any formula will be evaluated under these two distinct contexts.
> We call both contexts “evaluation contexts,” because they are contexts that change the way a formula is evaluated, providing different results for the same formula.

--- 
<br/>
<br/>

## Understanding What Is Happening

#### 1.What is happening if you define **a calculated column**, in Sales, with this code?
        Sales[SumOfSalesAmount] = SUM ( Sales[SalesAmount] )
> The total of SalesAmount for all the rows, that is, the same value for all the rows.

-   The formula means: “the sum of all sales amount as seen in the current filter context.”
-   As this is in a calculated column, DAX evaluates the formula row by row.
-   So the real question is “What is the current filter context?” 
-   Answer: It is the full database, because **DAX evaluates the formula outside of any pivot table or any other kind of filtering**. <br/>

> **Aggregate functions like SUM, MIN, and MAX used in calculated columns use the filter context only and ignore the row context, which DAX uses only to determine column values.** 
<br/>
<br/>

## 
#### 2. What is happening Now
###### Case: If you  have a column with the sales amount, another column for the product cost, and you might write the following expression:
     [GrossMargin] := Sales[SalesAmount] - Sales[ProductCost]
> An error, you cannot even author this formula.

In the formula, we used Sales[SalesAmount], which is a column name, that is, the value of SalesAmount in the Sales table. Is this definition lacking something? You should recall, from previous arguments, that the information missing here is the row from where to get the current value of SalesAmount. When you write this code inside a calculated column, DAX knows the row to use when it computes the expression, thanks to the row context. However, what happens for a measure? There is no iteration, there is no current row, that is, there is no row context.

The correct way to specify this calculation in a measure is to use aggregate functions:

        [GrossMargin] := SUM ( Sales[SalesAmount] ) - SUM ( Sales[ProductCost] )
        
