## Understanding CALCULATE

Technically speaking, CALCULATE alters filter context. It takes an expression (which can be a calculated field or another DAX formula) and modifies that expression by applying new filters. The syntax of CALCULATE is:

    =CALCULATE(expression, filter 1, filter 2, filter n...)

<br/>

## Understanding the Flow

*CALCULATE* alters the filter context coming from the pivot table by using none, one, or more filters prior to evaluating the expression. *CALCULATE* "reruns" the built-in filter engine in Power Pivot—the one that makes the filters automatically propagate from the lookup tables and flow downhill to the data tables. When the filter engine is rerun by *CALCULATE*, if there are any filters inside the *CALCULATE()* function, these filters become part of the filter context before the filter engine kicks in.

*CALCULATE* accepts any number of parameters and the only mandatory one is the fi rst, that is,the expression to evaluate. We call the conditions following the fi rst parameter fi lter arguments. *CALCULATE()* does the following:
 - It takes the current fi lter context and makes a copy of it into a new fi lter context.
 - It evaluates each fi lter argument and produces, for each condition, the list of valid values for that specifi c column.
 - If two or more fi lter arguments affect the same column, they are merged together using an *AND* operator (or, in mathematical terms, using the set intersection).
 - It uses the new condition to replace existing fi lters on the columns in the model. If a column already has a fi lter, then the new fi lter replaces the existing one. If, on the other hand, the column does not have a fi lter, then DAX simply applies the new fi lter to the column.
 - Once the new fi lter context is evaluated, CALCULATE computes the fi rst argument (the expression) in the new fi lter context. At the end, it will restore the original fi lter context, returning the computed result. 

> **Note** CALCULATE does another very important task: it transforms any existing row context
into an equivalent fi lter context. 
<br/>

## Examples

#### Example 1. Create a measure always returns the sales amount of Red product regardless the section of other color
      
            [SalesAmountBlack] :=
            CALCULATE (
                SUM ( Sales[SalesAmount] ),
                Product[Color] = "Black"
            )
           
<br/>

> If you focus on the third row (Blue), this is what happened: The formula started the evaluation in a filter context where the only value for the color was Blue. Then, CALCULATE evaluated a new condition (Color = Black) and, when it had to apply it to the new filter context, it replaced the existing condition, removing the filter on Blue and replacing it with the filter on Black.

<br/>

> Because the only column for which CALCULATE overrides the selection is the color, other columns maintain their filters. For example, if you put the calendar year on the columns, you see that the result is always the same for all the colors but it changes for different years.



#### Example 2. Create a measure that computes the sales amount for only the products where the unit price is at least twice the unit cost

        [HighProfitabilitySales] :=
        CALCULATE (
            SUM ( Sales[SalesAmount] ),
            FILTER( Product, Product[Unit Price] >= Product[Unit Cost] * 2)
         )

<br/>

> The condition involves two columns: Unit Cost and Unit Price.  CALCULATE cannot determine whether the condition should replace any existing filter on Unit Price, on Unit Cost, or on none of them. There is no way to author such a formula using the Boolean syntax.

<br/>

>  CALCULATE, as its first step, evaluates the filter arguments. Before doing anything else, CALCULATE evaluates the FILTER expression. FILTER is an iterator and it iterates over the Product table. FILTER will not see all the products; it will be able to see only the rows that are visible under the current filter context.

<br/>

> _**The filter parameters of CALCULATE are evaluated under the previous filter context. Only later CALCULATE creates its new filter context, under which it computes its expression parameter.**_

<br/>
> Think: What will happen if the measure are as follow?

    [HighProfitabilityALLSales] :=
    CALCULATE (
        SUM ( Sales[SalesAmount] ),
        FILTER (
        ALL ( Product ),
        Product[Unit Price] >= Product[Unit Cost] * 2
        )
    )


